---
layout: post
title: Should bad free throw shooters miss on purpose?
tags: [nba, data, python]
photoloc: /assets/posts/freethrows
toc: true
---

**TL;DR**: Maybe? It's an efficient play overall (1.20 PPP) but depends on how good a player is throwing good intentional misses. It is a higher-variance play, with a higher expected value probably only for the worst FT shooters.

## Background
Intentionally missing a FT is a common enough play at the end of games, when the shooting team is down two or three points and there isn't enough time left on the clock to keep trading free throws. There have been a couple of notable examples through the middle of this (2022-23) season: both Donovan Mitchell and Luka Dončić used this technique to tie up games very late in the fourth quarter, and both went on to win[^1]. But should this be a more common play? Could some of the NBA's worst free throw shooters benefit from leaving the bricks behind, and instead start tossing boomerangs?

What we're talking about here is throwing the ball at the front of the rim, aiming to get the rebound and end up with the ball in the middle of the lane and the defense out of sorts. It also doesn't hurt that the bottom of the NBA's career and season FT% lists is populated by centers, who have the extra height and catch radius that may improve their odds. 

The key questions are: 

1. How efficient can we expect this play to be?
2. How good could a player be at executing the self-rebound?  

## Recent Examples
So far this season (as of Feb 1st), there have been 76 possessions where the FT shooter missed their last FT, but got their own rebound to extend the possession. Below are about a dozen good examples from the current season, compiled into a video. These examples (largely) show situations where the rebound goes directly back to the shooter, who then puts up another quick shot. 

<div class="video" style="width:100%;height:0px;position:relative;padding-bottom:56.250%;"><iframe src="https://streamable.com/e/w7uybt" frameborder="0" width="100%" height="100%" allowfullscreen style="width:100%;height:100%;position:absolute;left:0px;top:0px;overflow:hidden;"></iframe></div>

These are from the [Advanced Stats Video](https://github.com/penborter/nba-data/blob/main/utilities/Advanced%20Stats%20Video.ipynb) notebook I put together to download the videos of specified plays from NBA Advanced Stats. You can filter the NBA play-by-play data for a particular scenario (e.g. missed last FTs followed by a rebound by the same player) and end up with a set of videos, one for each play.

Anyway, these plays typically fall into 4 categories, depending on whether the shooter gets the rebound directly or via a tip, and whether the shooter passes or shoots the ball after getting the rebound. We want to focus on direct rebounds. The trouble, as you'll see below, is that separating out tipped rebounds from direct is difficult to do programatically.  Passing and shooting after the rebound are both interesting, but my original sense of the play was a direct rebound and immediate shot, so we'll dive deeper into those.


{% include picture.html
   file="scenarios.png"
%}

## Method
We can generate a list of every single play that took place in a single NBA season, separating them out into possessions. Based on the play-by-play metadata, we can then filter down those possessions to find the ones that fit our scenario of interest.

### NBA API
We can use the [nba_api](https://github.com/swar/nba_api) Python package to get the play-by-play data. Specifically, we're using the package's `leaguegamefinder` and the `playbyplayv2` endpoints. The first will give us a list of game IDs for each team's games, and the second will give us the full game play-by-play for each game ID. If we do this for each game in a season, we can get a full list of every play in an NBA season. With this list, we can move to analysis. 

The key columns in the play-by-play data for this analysis are: 
- `EVENTMSGTYPE`: Play type (e.g. made shot, free throw, rebound, etc.)
- `EVENTMSGACTIONTYPE`: Sub-play type (e.g. 2nd of 2 FTs, stepback, etc.)
- `PLAYER1_ID`: Primary player ID
- `PCTIMESTRING`: Game clock time
- `SCORE`: Current score

I've downloaded and saved the play-by-play data for the last 5 seasons, with some additional columns added (including whether the possession ended on a particular play and which team was in possession at the team). I'll eventually put them up on Google Drive so that anyone can have a play with them. I'd put them up on Github but they're a bit too big (>250MB).   

### Measuring Possessions
We need to measure possessions to measure efficiency, calculating the points per possession (PPP[^2]). 

I won't go into too much detail about how the possessions are measured, but basically the diagram below shows that there are only four ways for a possession to end[^3]. These can be mapped to the `EVENTMSGTYPE` and `EVENTMSGACTION` attributes of each play and the subsequent play, to find each instance of possession-ending play during a game. We can write a function that returns true when a play matches the criteria of one of the possession-ending scenarios, and create a new column in our data that shows this true / false attribute for each play in our data set. 

There's a full walkthrough and code example in the [PBP Possessions](https://github.com/penborter/nba-data/blob/main/utilities/PBP%20Possessions.ipynb) notebook on Github. 

{% include picture.html
   file="possessions.png"
   caption="How many ways can a possession end? Note that a shooting foul includes when a team is in the bonus."
   class="wide"
%} 

### Possession Efficiency
For this analysis we're going to be measuring possession efficiency using PPP. In this case it's easy to measure with the play-by-play data: we take the scores at the end of the possession and subtract the scores at the start. 

The only wrinkle is that NBA play-by-play data provides the score as a string for both teams, e.g. `"123-120"`. So we split the string and do the before and after subtraction for both teams. Only one team should have a difference in score (which is our PPP); if both do, you've made a mistake in counting possessions. This happened to me a lot. It seems to be fixed now in [PBP Possessions](https://github.com/penborter/nba-data/blob/main/utilities/PBP%20Possessions.ipynb), so on we go. 

### Free throw offensive rebounds
Beyond marking up possessions, we're also on the lookout for specific possessions where a very particular event occurs: a missed FT is rebounded by the shooter. What that looks like in terms of the data is: a last free throw (`EVENTMSGACTIONTYPE = 10, 12 or 15`[^4]), followed by a rebound (`EVENTMSGTYPE = 4`), both with the same `PLAYER1_ID`. 

There are two main situations once the rebound is secured:
- The ball is pulled back out for another full (14 second) possession; or
- The FT shooter immediately puts the shot up.

To isolate the second situation, we can include a check for a subsequent shot (`EVENTMSGTYPE = 1 or 2`) with the same `PLAYER1_ID` and with a difference in `PCTIME` of less than 5 seconds.

## Results
Over the last 5 years, there have been 150 possessions where a player collects their own rebound and immediately shoots. Those plays have scored **1.20 PPP**. The year-by-year efficiency obviously fluctuates as each year is a fairly small sample size, but it ranges between 1.05 and 1.24 PPP.

### Efficiency
NBA league average FT shooting is 78%, which means these plays need to have a success rate of about 93% to be more efficient that a typical free throw. For really bad shooters (with career average FT% < 60%), this success rate cutoff drops down to a more feasible 72%.

This is probably the most difficult question to answer as part of this analysis: what is a reasonable expected rate of success for these plays? It's difficult––maybe harder than just going for the make––to intentionally miss a free throw in a way that comes right back to you. You're aiming for a much smaller sweet spot than a normal shot. You have to stay switched on to get the rebound. As Reggie Miller says: "shoot regular because you're gonna miss it anyway!" I (and Reggie) would expect a pretty strong correlation between a player's free-throw percentage and their ability to throw good self-rebounding free throws.

<div class="mb-2 video" style="width:100%;height:0px;position:relative;padding-bottom:56.250%;"><iframe src="https://streamable.com/e/v8lmjx" frameborder="0" width="100%" height="100%" allowfullscreen style="width:100%;height:100%;position:absolute;left:0px;top:0px;overflow:hidden;"></iframe></div>

There are also plenty of other methods to try to improve your FT%, before give up trying to make them entirely:
- Shooting underhanded (a.k.a. the Granny shot)
- Shooting one-handed (e.g. Jeremy Sochan)
- Warming up by miming your entire routine without the ball (e.g. Giannis)

These plays are also a case study in how not to box out the free throw shooter. Taller players shooting free throws are typically going to be boxed out by a shorter wing (often the 3rd tallest player on the opposing team). With a hard box out, these plays become much harder, but still not impossible. At the end of games players box out much more aggressively––it might be a better play at the start of games, with the opposition isn't expecting it and aren't trying as hard to end the possession.


### Just Direct Rebounds
More than half of these plays in the sample are non-intentional, and are often tipped rebounds––very few of them go directly back to the shooter. So, let's just look at those scenarios. We can't separate them from the other plays using the play-by-play data––the scorekeepers are busy enough without tracking every player's hands that touch the ball on the way to a rebound––this is a more manual job of individually watching and tagging each play.

 For example, if we just look at the 107 plays from 2021-22[^5], only 41 of them are direct-to-shooter rebounds, and only 25 of those are shots put straight back. We're down to less than a quarter of the plays we started with. These plays (rebound direct to shooter, who then puts the shot back up themselves) score at 1.12 PPP, only marginally higher than the 1.10 PPP of the 107 plays overall. To get a sense of the effect of having such a small sample size, the 41 direct-to-shooter plays (including those that get passed out) score at only 0.85 PPP.

[^1]: Luka Doncic ([NYK @ DAL - 2022-12-28](https://www.nba.com/game/nyk-vs-dal-0022200512)), and Donovan Mitchell ([CHI @ CLE - 2023-01-03](https://www.nba.com/game/chi-vs-cle-0022200552))
[^2]: Not to be confused with [Public-Private Partnerships](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public%E2%80%93private_partnership).
[^3]: Not shown in the diagram is the situation caused by technical free throws, where a team can make a FT but still maintain possession. This doesn't increase the number of ways a possession can end, though.
[^4]: 1 of 1, 2 of 2, and 3 of 3, respectively. 
[^5]: Just because it's the last full season, not because it substantially changes the results compared to the current 2022-23 season. 
