---
layout: post
title: Europe 2022
tags: [travel, photography]
photoloc: /assets/posts/europe
toc: true
---

We spent four weeks in Europe in October / November 2022. Here is a quick run through of the places we visited, and any recommendations[^1]. There's also a dedicated [photo gallery]({{ site.url }}/photos/euro) for this trip.

## Background 
Basically, the itinerary was to fly into and out of Paris, make our way down to Ljubljana going down and back up Italy, then fly back to Paris for Claudia's first conference and finish in Edinburgh for her second. The plan was to enjoy the holiday part first (in Italy and Slovenia), then work through the second half, mostly because we wanted the break and by the time the conferences finished we would've been getting well into November and colder weather. In hindsight, this was the wrong order completely; we should have gotten the work stuff out of the way first, and then enjoy the rest of the trip without a conference presentation hanging over Claudia's head. 

We were limited by having to fly in and out of Paris, the conference dates, and wanting to avoid flying as much as possible when in Europe. This is why we ended up taking a bit of a circuitous route, but it worked well. We caught Italian Frecciarossa high-speed trains everywhere for basically first half of the trip, which fell apart by the time we got to Trieste. There we needed to get an Italian intercity connection into town, and afterwards we ended up on an Austrian EuroCity express from Trieste to Ljubljana, an Hop flight from Ljubljana to Paris, and the Eurostar to and from London, and <mark>another train to Scotland</mark>.

## Paris (1st time)

We flew from Sydney to Paris, via Hong Kong, on Cathay Pacific.

Basically on this stop in Paris we caught the Roissy bus to the centre of town, walked across to the Paris Central Terminal, and jumped straight on a train to Lyon. We stopped for lunch-breakfast-dinner along the way (at this point—after about 24 hours on a plane—time zones and meal order had lost all meaning).

{% include picture.html 
  file="lyon-0.jpg"
  class="wide"
  title="Lyon market"
%}

{% include picture.html 
  class="wide"
  file="lyon-1.jpg; lyon-2.jpg"
  title="The view from outside our apartment; Lunch on the Saône"
  caption="Lyon was a class act — **L**: The view from outside our apartment. **R**: Lunch on the Saône."
%}

## Lyon


## Some Stats

Assorted statistics from the trip are below. These exclude the plane journeys at either end, which between them racked up about 34,000km and 40 hours[^2]. 

- Total distance travelled: 2,000km
- Photos taken: 1,283

[^1]: Note that I'm only writing this up about a year later. We both wrote a little travel diary at the time, and I'm mostly relying on that, the 1,200-odd pictures we took, and Claudia's excellent memory to piece this all together.
[^2]: These are just estimates (based on a quick Google). We actually flew a bit further because we took a nice little detour over Turkey to avoid Russia and Ukraine. 